---
layout: post
title:  Smart People Problems (A Short Literary Autobiography)
date: 2025-01-17
comments: true
disqus: true
image:  /assets/images/blog/lobotomy.PNG
author: Abby Nicole Yee
tags:   psychiatry, antipsychotics, brain
---

"I have lost my mind by spells and I do not dare think what I may do in those spells. May God forgive me and I hope everyone else will forgive me even if they cannot understand. My position is too awful to endure and nobody realizes it. What an end to a life in which I tried always to do my best." —L.M. Montgomery

"I, / like a river, / Have been turned aside by this harsh age. / I am a substitute. My life has flowed / Into another channel / And I do not recognize my shores." —Anna Akhmatova, “The fifth” (transl. D.M. Thomas) 
    
"I simply don’t know what to do; my brain cannot handle any more impressions or thoughts, it can’t take in any more, I don’t know anything, I don’t feel anything, I don’t understand anything. I have the feeling that something terrible has happened to me during these months, but I don’t know much about it. I don’t know anything about the world at all," —Franz Kafka, Letters to Milena
    
Writing is no longer fun for me now, but it is to my younger self’s credit that my first CW 100 science fiction short story got published in Clarkesworld Magazine, an American pro-paying market that paid me 27,900 pesos, with much revision over the years by me, and eventually by the editor who bought it along with many other great stories that made it past the slush pile. What might be obvious, because of its juvenile tone (according to one review), was that I wrote it in 2018, at the age of twenty, way before I lost interest in playing with words, before my playing took a destructive turn, and before I became equipped with more theory to notice everything about my reality and that of others’, and unfortunately, before brain damage from medications I was forced to take by a psychiatrist took away my writing and language skills, disbelieving my version of what happened to me. In her view—I’m sure not only hers—I was a paranoid and overly reactive patient who was self-traumatized by my own perceptions. But looking back at my own writing, I marvel at what I was really good at: literary pyrotechnics that I can define as an intuitive fluidity that masked my lack of knowledge, as well as my reality: I was a (twice) STEM reject from biology and computer science who preferred to write than really read, and how I learned to write is because of my avid internet consumption. As well as this, during the height of the pandemic, I realized I was twice unlucky in an invisible sense: I don’t absorb verbal instruction as well as a neurotypical, and still gape at the fact that for most people, audiobooks are more effective for learning, because somehow their brain structure magnetizes to an affinity for talking, and most people naturally remember what other people say to them for longer than one minute, even seconds after they say words, and be able to connect what they say into a bigger-picture understanding. 
    
To be clear, I always knew I had dysfunctional hearing—on top of my other more common and well-known issues like executive dysfunction, severe social anxiety, and mild obsessive compulsive disorder—though I wasn’t in any way deaf, that made it difficult to parse what other people were saying to me, but then it had worsened to a disabling degree that I am not surprised I couldn’t complete my creative writing degree which I shifted into in 2017. Moreover, I was also a pantser who didn’t outline and basically started fresh every time I wrote an academic paper, inefficiently relying on my own emotional whims that leaked into everything I wrote, hiding the fact that my working memory could handle larger chunks of meaning and didn’t need to plan. 

Now, my interest in science in the sense of what it can do for me in the present takes precedence over imaginary, far-off future landscapes, as well as what it can do for the long line of people like me who have been labeled psychotic and left to fester and/or become even more disabled than if they hadn’t taken medication marketed to help them, but really only helps other people control them by lobotomizing away the destabilizing reality of, and the language ability intimately tied to, their real yet parallel perceptions. 

Somewhere last year, I realized I was not above lying, because to survive my condition I have had to tell myself it’s because I became more critical, that the honeymoon “new relationship energy” had worn off just like any writer experiences, that my freelancing ate up more time and concern, and that I can regain what I lost and learn to enjoy writing again, just like when I had an intuitive grasp of syntax, punctuation, and idiomatic language proficiency that allowed me to experiment, and even a desire to say anything at all on paper. Ironically, I had worked as a transcriptionist of recorded audio since 2014, possibly contributing to my proficiency that came at the costly inefficiency of rewinding and replaying people’s speech, and I had also shifted my attention to voice acting during the pandemic, reading scripts that were mostly ads for people’s businesses. I also read a book called the Bitterest Pills: The Troubling Story of Antipsychotic Drugs five years after damage already happened, and it written by a psychiatrist critical of her own profession, and it inspired me to take up science writing, and hopefully use my creative work as a preliminary step towards a more accurate and helpful knowledge of how psychology and psychiatry could improve the lives of those it purports to treat. Admittedly, it’s also because I was prescribed anti-epileptic drugs (despite not having epilepsy) marketed as a “mood-stabilizer” and I have noticed a dearth of schizo-spectrum writers who are willing and/or still able to apprehend their experiences with psychiatry and their own depleted brain in a systematic, coherent way like doctors commonly can, much less understand the full picture of what and how their body reacted/reacts to when they regularly ingested drugs that had had damaging side-effects that are most egregiously being blamed on the disease prognosis itself rather than the polypharmacy-mandated medications. To end with a quote from the book: “The belittling of the drugs’ serious neurological side effects, the denial of their use to control unwanted behaviour and the lack of interest in properly researching their long-term effects all derive from a bias that sees the drugs as essentially benign because they work by rectifying an underlying disease.” 

It is my hope that my work will illuminate and inform alternative ways of thinking about and treating mental conditions. 

<a href="https://www.instagram.com/oxfordlemon/p/DCUazmfyhCB/?img_index=3">Cover photo source: "live Laugh lobotomy"</a>
